mixed-methods.md, before:


[about](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2010.03525.pdf) ::
[comment](https://github.com/margaretstorey/mixed-methods/issues) 

-----------

#  Multi-Methodology and Mixed Methods Research (Supplement)

<em>Studies that use two or more approaches to data collection or analysis to corroborate, complement and expand research findings (multi-methodology) or combine and integrate inductive research with deductive research (mixed methods), often but not necessarily relying on 
qualitative and/or quantitative data.</em>


## Application

This standard applies to software engineering studies that use two ir more data collection or analysis methods. It enumerates criteria related to 
the mixing of methodologies, not the methodologies themselves. For the latter, refer to method-specific standards. For example, a multi-methodology study combining a case study with an experiment should comply with **The Case Study Standard** and **The Experiment Standard** as well as this standard. 

## Specific Attributes

#### Essential:

- [ ] **justifies** using multiple methodologies and/or methods
- [ ] provides a **purpose statement** that conveys the overarching multi or 
  mixed method design intent (why)
- [ ] describes the **multi-methodology**, **multi-method** or **mixed method** design (what) 
- [ ] describes **which phases** of the research study the different methods or 
  methodologies are used in (when)
- [ ] describes how the design aligns with the research question or objective
- [ ] provides a **narrative** of the final study that aligns with the type of 
  multi-methodology or mixed method design used
- [ ] **integrates the findings** from all methods to address the research 
  question/objective
- [ ] acknowledges the **limitations** associated with integrating findings (e.g., samples that are drawn from different populations may introduce limitations when the findings are integrated, or biases may be introduced by the sequential or parallel nature of a mixed design).
 
#### Desirable:

- [ ] **defines** the multi-methodology or mixed method design used
- [ ] describes and justifies **sample reuse** (or no reuse, or partial reuse) across 
  methods
- [ ] illustrated the research design using a **visual model** (diagram)
- [ ] indicates the use of multiple methods or mixed method design in the **title** 
- [ ] (for mixed-methods) includes, in the **literature review**, a mixture of quantitative, 
  qualitative, and mixed methods related work
- [ ] **distinguishes the additional value** from using a multi-methodology or mixed 
  method design in terms of corroboration, complementarity, and expansion 
  (breadth and depth)
- [ ] discusses **discrepancies and incongruent findings** from the use of multiple 
  methods
- [ ] describes the main **philosophical, epistemological, and/or theoretical foundations** 
  that the authors use and relate those to the planned use of multi or mixed methods in the study
- [ ] describes the **challenges** faced in the design and how those were or could be 
  mitigated
- [ ] describes how the methods and their findings relate to one or more 
      **theories or theoretical frameworks**
- [ ] describes **ethical issues** that may have been presented through the blend of 
  multi- or mixed methods

#### Extraordinary: 

- [ ] contributes to the methodological discourse surrounding multi-methodology or mixed-methods


## General Quality Criteria

General quality criteria discussed in the guidelines for each method should be 
considered.  In the case of a multi-methodology or multi-method design, the 
reliability of the findings that are specific to the triangulation goals should 
be assessed.  In the case of a mixed method design, the research may also 
require a “legitimation step to assess the trustworthiness of both the 
qualitative and quantitative data and subsequent interpretations” 
[Johnson/On., P. 22].

## Antipatterns

- **Uninvited guest:** A research method is not clearly introduced in the paper 
  introduction/methodology and makes an unexpected entrance in the discussion or 
  limitations sections of the paper
- **Smoke and mirrors:** Overselling a study as a multi-methodology or mixed method design 
  when one approach at best offers a token or anecdotal contribution to the research motivation 
  or findings
- **Selling your soul:** Employing an additional method to appeal to a methodological purist 
  during the review process that does not contribute substantively to the research findings
- **Integration failure:** Poor integration of findings from all methods used
- **Limitation shirker**: Failure to discuss limitations from all methods used or from their 
  integration
- **Missing the mark:** Misalignment of multi- or mixed method design with the research 
  question/objective
- **Cargo cult research:** Using methods where the research team lacks expertise in those methods, 
  but hopes they work
- **Design by committee:** Failure to agree on a crisp research question/objective (may be 
   induced by different epistemological perspectives or use of heterogeneous methods)
- **Golden hammer:** relying on superficial, typically quantitative analysis of rich qualitative data 
- **Sample contamination:** a mixed method sequential design where the same participants are used in multiple,
     sequential methods without accounting for potential contamination from earlier method(s) to later ones.
- **Ignoring the writing on the wall:** In a mixed method sequential design, failing to use 
  findings from an earlier study when forming an instrument for a study in a later phase of 
  the research

## Examples of Acceptable Deviations

- Conference page limits may make it particularly challenging to share sufficient details 
  on all methods used. These details may be available in other publications or supplementary 
  materials.  
- Describing the research in terms of cycles or ongoing parallel processes instead of phases.


## Invalid Criticisms

- In the case of non-equal research designs, rejecting the paper on the basis of 
  limitations of a minor method (e.g., few participants). 
- The mixed- or multi-method approach isn't necessary (when it *is* beneficial)
- The method(ologie)s do not contribute equally ("non-equal" research designs are ok)
- The mixed- or multi-method approach introduces additional limitations
- The method(ologie)s have different philosophical foundations or are otherwise incompatible
- In an un-equal design, the wrong method is dominent
- The method(ologie)s have inconsistent findings

## Notes

- Multi-methodology research is sometimes referred to as multi-method, blended research, 
  or integrative research (see P. 118 Johnson 2008).  Mixed method research is 
  sometimes seen as a special case of multi-methodology research that blends 
  deductive and inductive research, or mixes methods that rely on quantitative 
  and qualitative data. 
- The term "method" may refer to a way of collecting data or a broader process of doing research. 
  In mixed methods research, "method" means the broader process of doing research. 
- The term "methodology" may refer to an approach to doing research or the study of how research is done.
   In "multi-methodology," methodology means a process of doing research  
- For multi-method research, it is important to distinguish between using different methods 
  of collecting data (e.g., as part of an inductive case study) and using different research 
  strategies (e.g., complementing an inductive case study with a deductive experiment in a 
  later stage of the research).
- Some experts on mixed methods use specific terms to refer to core mixed method designs 
  (e.g., Convergent mixed methods, Explanatory sequential mixed methods, Exploratory sequential 
  mixed methods are defined by Creswell & Creswell (2007) and Quantitatively driven approaches/designs, 
  Qualitatively driven approaches/designs, Interactive or equal status designs are used by 
  Johnson, Onwuegbuzie, & Turner, 2007).   

## Suggested Readings (in progress) 

1. Bergman, M. M. (2011). The good, the bad, and the ugly in mixed methods research and design. 
Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 5(4), 271-275. doi:10.1177/1558689811433236

2. Creswell, John W., V. L. Plano Clark, Michelle L. Gutmann, and William E. Hanson. 
"An expanded typology for classifying mixed methods research into designs." 
A. Tashakkori y C. Teddlie, Handbook of mixed methods in social and behavioral research (2003): 
209-240.

3. Easterbrook, Steve, Janice Singer, Margaret-Anne Storey, and Daniela Damian. 
"Selecting empirical methods for software engineering research." In Guide to advanced 
empirical software engineering, pp. 285-311. Springer, London, 2008.

4. Johnson, R. & Onwuegbuzie, Anthony & Turner, Lisa. (2007). Toward a Definition of Mixed Methods 
Research. Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 1, 112-133. Journal of Mixed Methods Research. 1. 112 -133. 10.1177/1558689806298224.

5. Ladner, S., Mixed Methods: A short guide to applied mixed methods design, 2019. 
https://www.mixedmethodsguide.com/ 

6. O'Cathain, A. (2010). Assessing the quality of mixed methods research: Towards a comprehensive 
framework. In A. Tashakkori & C. Teddlie (Eds.), Handbook of mixed methods in social and 
behavioral research (2nd edition) (pp. 531-555). Thousand Oaks: Sage.

7. Pace, R., Pluye, P., Bartlett, G., Macaulay, A., Salsberg, J., Jagosh, J., & Seller, R. (2010). 
Reliability of a tool for concomitantly appraising the methodological quality of qualitative, 
quantitative and mixed methods research: a pilot study. 38th Annual Meeting of the North 
American Primary Care Research Group (NAPCRG), Seattle, USA.

8. Pluye, P., Gagnon, M.P., Griffiths, F. & Johnson-Lafleur, J. (2009). A scoring system for 
appraising mixed methods research, and concomitantly appraising qualitative, quantitative and 
mixed methods primary studies in Mixed Studies Reviews. International Journal of Nursing Studies,
46(4), 529-46.

9. Storey, MA., Ernst, N.A., Williams, C. et al. The who, what, how of software engineering 
research: a socio-technical framework. Empir Software Eng 25, 4097–4129 (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-020-09858-z

10. Tashakkori, Abbas, and John W. Creswell. "The new era of mixed methods." (2007): 3-7.

11. Teddlie, Charles, and Abbas Tashakkori. "A general typology of research designs featuring 
mixed methods." Research in the Schools 13, no. 1 (2006): 12-28.

12. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multimethodology 

## Examplars (in progress) 

I am compiling this [list](mixed-examples.md).  

## Authors

Original author: Margaret-Anne Storey, University of Victoria

Commit message:

Minor changes after discussion with Paul

mixed-methods.md, after:


[about](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2010.03525.pdf) ::
[comment](https://github.com/margaretstorey/mixed-methods/issues) 

-----------

#  Multi-Methodology and Mixed Methods Research (Supplement)

<em>Studies that use two or more approaches to data collection or analysis to corroborate, complement and expand research findings (multi-methodology) or combine and integrate inductive research with deductive research (mixed methods), often but not necessarily relying on 
qualitative and/or quantitative data.</em>


## Application

This standard applies to software engineering studies that use two ir more data collection or analysis methods. It enumerates criteria related to 
the mixing of methodologies, not the methodologies themselves. For the latter, refer to method-specific standards. For example, a multi-methodology study combining a case study with an experiment should comply with **The Case Study Standard** and **The Experiment Standard** as well as this standard. 

## Specific Attributes

#### Essential:

- [ ] **justifies** using multiple methodologies and/or methods
- [ ] provides a **purpose statement** that conveys the overarching multi or 
  mixed method design intent (why)
- [ ] describes the **multi-methodology**, **multi-method** or **mixed method** design (what) 
- [ ] describes **which phases** of the research study the different methods or 
  methodologies are used in (when)
- [ ] describes how the design aligns with the research question or objective
- [ ] **integrates the findings** from all methods to address the research 
  question/objective
- [ ] acknowledges the **limitations** associated with integrating findings (e.g., samples that are drawn from different populations may introduce limitations when the findings are integrated, or biases may be introduced by the sequential or parallel nature of a mixed design).
 
#### Desirable:

- [ ] **defines** the multi-methodology or mixed method design used
- [ ] describes and justifies **sample reuse** (or no reuse, or partial reuse) across 
  methods
- [ ] illustrated the research design using a **visual model** (diagram)
- [ ] indicates the use of multiple methods or mixed method design in the **title** 
- [ ] (for mixed-methods) includes, in the **literature review**, a mixture of quantitative, 
  qualitative, and mixed methods related work
- [ ] **distinguishes the additional value** from using a multi-methodology or mixed 
  method design in terms of corroboration, complementarity, and expansion 
  (breadth and depth)
- [ ] discusses **discrepancies and incongruent findings** from the use of multiple 
  methods
- [ ] describes the main **philosophical, epistemological, and/or theoretical foundations** 
  that the authors use and relate those to the planned use of multi or mixed methods in the study
- [ ] describes the **challenges** faced in the design and how those were or could be 
  mitigated
- [ ] describes how the methods and their findings relate to one or more 
      **theories or theoretical frameworks**
- [ ] describes **ethical issues** that may have been presented through the blend of 
  multi- or mixed methods

#### Extraordinary: 

- [ ] contributes to the methodological discourse surrounding multi-methodology or mixed-methods


## General Quality Criteria

General quality criteria discussed in the guidelines for each method should be 
considered.  In the case of a multi-methodology or multi-method design, the 
reliability of the findings that are specific to the triangulation goals should 
be assessed.  In the case of a mixed method design, the research may also 
require a “legitimation step to assess the trustworthiness of both the 
qualitative and quantitative data and subsequent interpretations” 
[Johnson/On., P. 22].

## Antipatterns

- **Uninvited guest:** A research method is not clearly introduced in the paper 
  introduction/methodology and makes an unexpected entrance in the discussion or 
  limitations sections of the paper
- **Smoke and mirrors:** Overselling a study as a multi-methodology or mixed method design 
  when one approach at best offers a token or anecdotal contribution to the research motivation 
  or findings
- **Selling your soul:** Employing an additional method to appeal to a methodological purist 
  during the review process that does not contribute substantively to the research findings
- **Integration failure:** Poor integration of findings from all methods used
- **Limitation shirker**: Failure to discuss limitations from all methods used or from their 
  integration
- **Missing the mark:** Misalignment of multi- or mixed method design with the research 
  question/objective
- **Cargo cult research:** Using methods where the research team lacks expertise in those methods, 
  but hopes they work
- **Design by committee:** Failure to agree on a crisp research question/objective (may be 
   induced by different epistemological perspectives or use of heterogeneous methods)
- **Golden hammer:** relying on superficial, typically quantitative analysis of rich qualitative data 
- **Sample contamination:** a mixed method sequential design where the same participants are used in multiple,
     sequential methods without accounting for potential contamination from earlier method(s) to later ones.
- **Ignoring the writing on the wall:** In a mixed method sequential design, failing to use 
  findings from an earlier study when forming an instrument for a study in a later phase of 
  the research

## Examples of Acceptable Deviations

- Conference page limits may make it particularly challenging to share sufficient details 
  on all methods used. These details may be available in other publications or supplementary 
  materials.  
- Describing the research in terms of cycles or ongoing parallel processes instead of phases.


## Invalid Criticisms

- The method(ologie)s do not contribute equally (a non-equal design) or the minor method is limited (e.g. few participants).
- The mixed- or multi-method approach isn't necessary (when it *is* beneficial)
- The method(ologie)s have different philosophical foundations or are otherwise incompatible
- In an unequal design, the wrong method is dominant (this is a study design choice not a flaw )
- The method(ologie)s have inconsistent findings

## Notes

- Multi-methodology research is sometimes referred to as multi-method, blended research, 
  or integrative research (see P. 118 Johnson 2008).  Mixed method research is 
  sometimes seen as a special case of multi-methodology research that blends 
  deductive and inductive research, or mixes methods that rely on quantitative 
  and qualitative data. 
- The term "method" may refer to a way of collecting data or a broader process of doing research. 
  In mixed methods research, "method" means the broader process of doing research. 
- The term "methodology" may refer to an approach to doing research or the study of how research is done.
   In "multi-methodology," methodology means a process of doing research  
- For multi-method research, it is important to distinguish between using different methods 
  of collecting data (e.g., as part of an inductive case study) and using different research 
  strategies (e.g., complementing an inductive case study with a deductive experiment in a 
  later stage of the research).
- Some experts on mixed methods use specific terms to refer to core mixed method designs 
  (e.g., Convergent mixed methods, Explanatory sequential mixed methods, Exploratory sequential 
  mixed methods are defined by Creswell & Creswell (2007) and Quantitatively driven approaches/designs, 
  Qualitatively driven approaches/designs, Interactive or equal status designs are used by 
  Johnson, Onwuegbuzie, & Turner, 2007).   

## Suggested Readings (in progress) 

1. Bergman, M. M. (2011). The good, the bad, and the ugly in mixed methods research and design. 
Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 5(4), 271-275. doi:10.1177/1558689811433236

2. Creswell, John W., V. L. Plano Clark, Michelle L. Gutmann, and William E. Hanson. 
"An expanded typology for classifying mixed methods research into designs." 
A. Tashakkori y C. Teddlie, Handbook of mixed methods in social and behavioral research (2003): 
209-240.

3. Easterbrook, Steve, Janice Singer, Margaret-Anne Storey, and Daniela Damian. 
"Selecting empirical methods for software engineering research." In Guide to advanced 
empirical software engineering, pp. 285-311. Springer, London, 2008.

4. Johnson, R. & Onwuegbuzie, Anthony & Turner, Lisa. (2007). Toward a Definition of Mixed Methods 
Research. Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 1, 112-133. Journal of Mixed Methods Research. 1. 112 -133. 10.1177/1558689806298224.

5. Ladner, S., Mixed Methods: A short guide to applied mixed methods design, 2019. 
https://www.mixedmethodsguide.com/ 

6. O'Cathain, A. (2010). Assessing the quality of mixed methods research: Towards a comprehensive 
framework. In A. Tashakkori & C. Teddlie (Eds.), Handbook of mixed methods in social and 
behavioral research (2nd edition) (pp. 531-555). Thousand Oaks: Sage.

7. Pace, R., Pluye, P., Bartlett, G., Macaulay, A., Salsberg, J., Jagosh, J., & Seller, R. (2010). 
Reliability of a tool for concomitantly appraising the methodological quality of qualitative, 
quantitative and mixed methods research: a pilot study. 38th Annual Meeting of the North 
American Primary Care Research Group (NAPCRG), Seattle, USA.

8. Pluye, P., Gagnon, M.P., Griffiths, F. & Johnson-Lafleur, J. (2009). A scoring system for 
appraising mixed methods research, and concomitantly appraising qualitative, quantitative and 
mixed methods primary studies in Mixed Studies Reviews. International Journal of Nursing Studies,
46(4), 529-46.

9. Storey, MA., Ernst, N.A., Williams, C. et al. The who, what, how of software engineering 
research: a socio-technical framework. Empir Software Eng 25, 4097–4129 (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-020-09858-z

10. Tashakkori, Abbas, and John W. Creswell. "The new era of mixed methods." (2007): 3-7.

11. Teddlie, Charles, and Abbas Tashakkori. "A general typology of research designs featuring 
mixed methods." Research in the Schools 13, no. 1 (2006): 12-28.

12. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multimethodology 

## Examplars (in progress) 

I am compiling this [list](mixed-examples.md).  

## Authors

Original author: Margaret-Anne Storey, University of Victoria
